---
hide:
  - navigation
---

# Release Notes

## 2.7.4

### Fixed

- `WSGIMiddleware` optional was being called in the core middlewares.

## 2.7.3

### Added

- Allowing `app` to load as a string as alternative to an object inside the `Include`.

### Changed

- Internal code for lazy objects.
- Make `a2wsgi` optional for `WSGIMiddleware`.
- `httpx` is now only a depedency for testing.
- Cleared some core dependencies.

## 2.7.2

### Changed

- Security update for python multipart.
- Update minimum Starlette requirement.

## 2.7.1

### Added

- `settings_module` as replacement for `settings_config`.
- Deprecation warning for `settings_config` in favour of `settings_module` parameter.

### Changed

- Added improvements to the scaffold generated by `esmerald createproject` in the tests.
- Added extra origin type for when a MsgSpec Struct is passed in the payload of a handler.

### Fixed

- OpenAPI Tags not loading from top down if handler had `tags=None`.
- TestClient to allow passing pluggables inside `create_client`.

## 2.7.0

### Changed

- `Token.decode()` is now a `classmethod`. This allows to subclass the `Token` and add extra fields into the model
allowing operations like `encode()` with extra claims. This can be useful for situations like claiming a `refresh` or `access` token.
- Internal handlers decorators are now wrapped in a function decorator. This does not affect anything but allows more control over the middleware
calls to async ASGI applications.

### Fixed

- OpenAPI when overriding the response for the default status codes of the handlers.

## 2.6.0

### Added

- New [createdeployment](./directives/directives.md#create-deployment) directive allowing
the generation of deployment scaffolds for any Esmerald project.

### Changed

- Added `requirements` to the `createproject` directive generating the minimum requirements
for an Esmerald project.

### Fixed

- `BaseAuthentication` for `self.app` when its of the type of HTTPHandler and WebSocketHandler.

## 2.5.0

### Changed

- Upgraded internal dependencies.
- The internals for the middleware are now delegated to Starlette directly.
- Middlewares of Gateway and WebSocket Gateways are now delegated to Starlette.

### Fixed

- Internals to be compliant with new version of Starlette.
- Building middleware stack for the `Middleware` object.
- Internal testing to reflect the new way of the `Include` to be compliant with the ASGI spec.


## 2.4.3

### Fixed

- OpenAPI `contact` it was not parsing properly on transformation.
- Rename `include` attribute from `Param` (base) and call `include_in_schema`.
- Missing `nest_asyncio` dependency when using `esmerald shell`.

## 2.4.2

### Changed

- Pin starlette version to `0.32.0.post1`

## 2.4.1

### Fix

- Regression when performing a `model_dump` of pydantic models in the responses.
- Re-enable `orjson` for generic response parsing.

## 2.4.0

### Changed

- Updated SwaggerUI version.
- Updated [responses](./responses.md) with a `msgspec` response example.

### Added

- Support for [payload](./extras/request-data.md) as alternative to `data`. This aims
to make the process more intuitive and easy to implement. [#199](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/199).
- [Context](./context.md) - The new context object for the [handlers](https://esmerald.dev/routing/handlers/).
- Support for [msgspec](./msgspec.md) natively allowing to have more than just Pydantic.

!!! Note
    Esmerald is not fully tight with Pydantic which means it's more flexible and extendible and allows more versatility.

### Fixed

- Missing [Request](./requests.md) document.
- Removed the use of `random` for the secrets in favour of the `secrets` library instead.
- Contrib documentation updates regarding the Authorization headers.

## 2.3.1

### Fixed

- `Middleware` as an independent ASGI app on an `Include` level.

!!! Warning
    This was supposed to go in the release [2.3.0](#230) but it was not merged on time to make the
    release.

## 2.3.0

### Changed

- OpenAPI fields are permanently moved to [OpenAPIConfig](https://esmerald.dev/configurations/openapi/config/)
making the codebase cleaner. The options are still available via `settings` in case of wanting to
override the defaults but not via instantiation parameters. Via instantiation the `OpenAPIConfig` is the
one to be used.

!!! Warning
	This is a breaking change. The functionality itself still works as it is supposed to but from now on
	instead of passing via Esmerald instance, you need to pass the variables via [OpenAPIConfig](https://esmerald.dev/configurations/openapi/config/).
	object instead.

### Added

- Annotated for documentation generators.
- Add new documentation structure for Esmerald base.
- Add [API Reference](http://esmerald.dev/references/) . [#196](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/196)

### Fixed

- Allow tags for levels. When a tag is added to an `Include`, `Gateway`, or any other level,
the tags are appended to the final handler. This allows inheriting from existing tags for OpenAPI.
- `Middleware` on levels treating each level as an independent ASGI app.

## 2.2.0

### Changed

- Updated `OpenAPIConfig` documentation.
- Deprecate `v1`. Esmerald prior to version 2.0 is no longer supported.

### Added

-  Allow importing from from string into `Factory`. [#179](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/179) by [@tarsil](https://github.com/tarsil).
-  New security objects for OpenAPI documentation.
-  New [OpenAPI](./openapi.md) documentation describing the ways of using it and what is available with examples.
-  New [SimpleAPIView](./routing/apiview.md#simpleapiview) supported.
-  New [CreateAPIView](./routing/apiview.md#createapiview) supported.
-  New [ReadAPIView](./routing/apiview.md#readapiview) supported.
-  New [DeleteAPIView](./routing/apiview.md#deleteapiview) supported.
-  New [ListAPIView](./routing/apiview.md#listapiview) supported.

### Fixed

- OpenAPI `security` was not working as intended.


## 2.1.0

### Changed

- Update base requirements and pydantic to 2.4.

### Added

- New Factory added for dependency injection allowing to pass any time via Factory instantiation. [PR #163](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/163) by [@ShahriyarR](https://github.com/ShahriyarR).
- Support for [Mongoz](https://mongoz.tarsild.io) showcasing how to integrate Esmerald with an ODM (MongoDB).
- Documentation about how to use Esmerald contrib with [Mongoz](./databases/mongoz/motivation.md).

### Fixed

- Typos in the documentation.
- Pydantic 2.4 compatibility and updating to new names for the functions.

## 2.0.6

### Changed

- Updated requirements for Pydantic and Starlette.
- Removed unnecessary dependencies.

### Added

- Support for async `has_permission` on Permissions.
- Add new landing page.

### Fixed

- `email-validator` error being thrown from `openapi-schemas-pydantic` requirement.

## 2.0.5

### Changed

- Updated the way `esmerald` client operates internally.
- Updated internal minimum requirements.

### Fix

- Regression in OpenAPI when adding middleware to `Gateway` or `HTTPHandler`. When a middleware
was added, the OpenAPI would not generate the docs for it. The API would still work but not OpenAPI
docs.

## 2.0.4

### Changed

- Updated functional internal crypto to only use the system random.
- Cleaner codebase for the application settings.
- Updated version of Asyncz to be at least 0.5.0.

### Added

- Custom exception handlers, `from esmerald.exception_handlers import value_error_handler`.
- New native exception handler for pydantic v2 Validation errors in general.
- Dataclasses (normal and Pydantic dataclases) are now supported as Esmerald Responses.
- Support for [OpenAPI Webhooks](./routing/webhooks.md).
- Improved [Responses](./responses.md) documentation with examples using Pydantic BaseModel and dataclasses.
- OpenAPI Spotlight Elements documentation. When starting the application, accesing the default `/docs/elements`.
- Support for [Edgy](https://edgy.tarsild.io) ORM. [Docs here](https://esmerald.dev/databases/edgy/motivation/).

### Fixed

- Removed old pydantic v1 syntax from tests and applications.
- `add_include()` that wasn't generating signature models upon import.
- OpenAPI query params with defaults weren't loading properly.

## 2.0.3

!!! Note
    This addition was supposed to go in the release [2.0.2](#202) but somehow it was missed in the merge of
    the pull requests. It is not a bug fix but instead is a simple new
    [directive](./directives/shell.md) that can be useful for those who like using the command-line.

    It is important to understand that this support **won't be available on releases** of Esmerald
    1.X.

### Added

- [Interactive shell](./directives/shell.md) support directive for any Esmerald application.

## 2.0.2

### Changed

- Updated Field, Form and Body from `esmerald.params` with current defaults.
- Removed redundant cast from `File` to `Body` as it is a subclass.

### Added

- Added `strict` and `max_digits` esmerald params `esmerald.params`.
- Deprecate `example` as OpenAPI 3.10 supports `examples`. Use examples instead of `example`.

### Fixed

- [UploadFile](./extras/upload-files.md) sending as a list and as normal.
This got broken when the migration to pydantic 2.0 happened.
- `File` and `Form` from `esmerald.params` now accept `annotation`.
- OpenAPI for `UploadFile` as single and list now being parsed as a model.


## 2.0.1

This is a small fix into the parser of lists for the OpenAPI specification.

### Fixed

- [OpenAPIResponse](https://esmerald.dev/responses#openapi-responses) now allows proper parse of
lists as definition. [More details](https://esmerald.dev/responses/#lists).

## 2.0.0

!!! Warning
	When upgrading Esmerald to version 2, this also means the use of Pydantic 2.0 at its core as well as corresponsing technologies
	already updated to version 2 of Pydantic (Saffier, Asyncz...).
	If you still wish to continue to use Pydantic 1 with Esmerald, it is recommended to use Esmerald prior to version 2.0 which it will
	be maintained for a shor period but we **strongly recommend to always use the latest version**.

### Changed

- **Major update of the core of Esmerald from Pydantic v1 to Pydantic v2.**
- `ResponseSpecification` renamed to `OpenAPIResponse`, `from esmerald.openapi.datastructures import OpenAPIResponse`.
- Changed deprecated functions such as `validator` and `root_validator` to `field_validator` and `model_validator`.
- Transformers no longer support custom fields. Pydantic natively handles that.
- EsmeraldSignature updated for the new version of the FieldInfo.
- `params` reflect the new Pydantic FieldInfo.
- Deprecated OpenAPIView in favour of the new OpenAPI documentation generator.
- Changed OpenAPI config to reflect the new generation of OpenAPI documentation.
- Internal data field is now returning Body type parameter making it easier to integrate with Pydantic 2.0.
- General codebase cleanup.
- Removed old OpenAPI document generator in favour to the newest, fastest, simplest and more effective approach in v2.
- Remove the support of pydantic 1.0. Esmerald 2+ will only support pydantic 2+.

### Added

- OpenAPI support for OAuth2.

### Fixed

- FileResponse `stat_result` and Stream `iterator` typing.
- Fix typing across the whole codebase.
- Transformers are now generating Param fields directly.
- Updated __fields__ in favour of the new pydantic model_fields approach.

## 1.3.0

### Changed

- OpenAPI imports and removed unused dependencies.
- Deprecate `pydantic_factories` in favour of `pyfactories`.
- Dropped support for Tortoise ORM natively.

### Fixed

- Rename `scripts/format` to `scripts/lint` for consistency.
- `get_hasher` from contrib fixed with the return value of the algorithm.
- Typing of the codebase updated.

## 1.2.5

### Fixed

- Removed deprecated functions allowing the mount and host.
- Fixed show_urls for openapi specification.

## 1.2.4

### Changed

- Updated pyproject.toml keywords.
- Updated to the latest [Starlette 0.28.0](https://www.lilya.dev/release-notes/).
- Exception handler logic refactored.

## 1.2.3

### Fixed

- Upgrade Starlette version to >=0.27.0 for a security release. Details on [Starlette's security](https://github.com/encode/starlette/security/advisories/GHSA-v5gw-mw7f-84px)

## 1.2.2

### Fixed

- Exception handler message when `run` directive does not find custom directive properly.

## 1.2.1

### Fixed

- Lifespan generator for the `run` directive.

## 1.2.0

### Changed

- Updated native requirements of the project.
- Removed old core management in favour of click.
- Deprecated `management` package in favour of `directives`. [#83](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/83).
- Deprecate `esmerald-admin`. Now you can simply call `esmerald` with the same directives
as before. Simplification via command line [#86](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/86).
	- Example:
		- `esmerald createproject <NAME>`
		- `esmerald createpapp <NAME>`

### Added

- Support for Ruff.
- New esmerald core admin management directives [#83](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/83).
- New directives client.
- Added rich for command line colours, tables.
- New native directives:
	- [directives](./directives/directives.md#list-available-directives).
	- [runserver](./directives/directives.md#runserver).
	- [show_urls](./directives/directives.md#show-urls).

### Fixed

- Linting and formatting issues with Ruff.

## 1.1.0

### Changed

- Updated support for Starlette 0.26.1
- Updated support for Lifespan [./lifespan.md] events
- Requests url_for parsing the URL type to return string on parsing [#69](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/69).
- Esmerald official documentation also available on https://esmerald.dev [#70](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/70).
- Updated Github CI to deploy also to https://esmerald.dev [#73](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/73)

### Added

- Internal implementation of on_startup and on_shutdown. [#74](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/74).
- Added new internal implementation of on_event and add_event_handler functions. [#74](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/74).
- Missing documentation about the background tasks [#71](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/71)
- Documentation for lifespan events [#72](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/72)
- Added condition to allow cached_properties from the EsmeraldAPISettings and in the settings without raising an Exception.
- New handlers. OPTIONS, HEAD and TRACE. Check out the  [handlers](./routing/handlers.md) for more details.

### Fixed

- New Starlette Lifespan [#75](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/75). This is now also available to be done in the same way Starlette does. Internally Esmerald also implements the on_startup and on_shutdown but that is an unique implementation. This implementation follows the same pattern as the official [Starlette Bridge](https://starlette-bridge.tarsild.io/)

## 1.0.0

### Changed

- ChildEsmerald now supports the parent which means it can share middlewares and interceptors
across main application and children.

    !!! Note
        Prior to version 1.0.0, sharing resources between Esmerald and ChildEsmerald was not allowed
        and it needed to be treated as completely isolated application. In the version 1.0.0 you can
        still isolate them but you can also share resources.


## 0.15.0

### Added

-  Esmerald [Pluggables](./pluggables.md) [#60](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/60).

	This is the feature for the esmerald ecosystem that allows you to create plugins and extensions for any application
	as well as distribute them as installable packages.

- New [add_child_esmerald](./routing/router.md#add_child_esmerald) allowing adding via function, ChildEsmerald [#61](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/61).

	Add child esmeralds via functions once the application is created and dynamically.


## 0.14.0

### Added

- Brand new support for [Saffier](https://saffier.tarsild.io). A brand new ORM running
on the top of SQLAlchemy in an async fashion.
- New `base_user` and `middleware` support for Saffier with Esmerald.
- New docs regarding the [Saffier](https://esmerald.dev/databases/saffier/motivation/) integration.
Those include also an example how to use it.

### Changed

- **Breaking change** - Removed support for python 3.7. This was blocking the technology from
evolving at a normal pace and blocking security patches from being properly applied.

### Fixed

- Old package versioning conflicts.

## 0.13.0

### Changed

- Added support for Starlette 0.25.0

### Fixed

- Internal mapping types [#45](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/56)

## 0.12.0

### Changed

- Added support for Starlette 0.24.0.

### Fixed

- `debug` parameter regression.

## 0.11.2

### Changed

- Code clean for responses and encoders.
- JWTConfig leeway parameter to accept int and str.

### Fixed

- `ujson` dumps parameter error.

## 0.11.1

### Changed

- Improved `OrJSON`, `UJSON`, `ORJSONResponse` and `UJSONResponse` when importing dependency.

## 0.11.0

### Added

To make esmerald more optional and feature modular, this release brings some backwards
incompatibilities that should be addressed when moving to this version. Check out
the dcumentation for more details if this release notes doesn't cover it all.

### Changed

- Moved `UJSON`, `UJSONResponse`, `OrJSON` and `ORJSONResponse` to be optional dependencies [#45](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/45).
- Changed the imports for `ORJSONResponse` to `from esmerald.responses.encoders import ORJSONResponse` [#45](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/45).
- Changed the imports for `UJSONResponse` to `from esmerald.responses.encoders import UJSONResponse` [#45](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/45).
- Changed the imports for `OrJSON` to `from esmerald.datastructures.encoders import OrJSON` [#45](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/45).
- Changed the imports for `UJSON` to `from esmerald.datastructures.encoders import UJSON` [#45](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/45).
- Moved the scheduler to optional installation with `pip install esmerald[schedulers]` [#45](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/45).

#### Backwards compatibility
This is only applied for those who have esmerald prior to `0.11.0`.
If you already had template configurations, jwt, schedulers or all the features you need to update the imports to:

- **TemplateConfig**:
    ```python
    from esmerald.config.template import TemplateConfig
    ```

- **JWTConfig**:
    ```python
    from esmerald.config.jwt import JWTConfig
    ```
- Scheduler class is now imported directly from `asyncz`:
    ```python
    from asyncz.schedulers import AsyncIOScheduler # for the Scheduler class
    from asyncz.contrib.esmerald.decorator import scheduler # for the decorator
    ```

## 0.10.0

### Added

- `add_apiview` to the Esmerald class.
- [JSON](./responses.md#json), [OrJSON](./responses.md#orjson) and [UJSON](./responses.md#ujson) responses [#44](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/44).

### Changed

- `Template` now accepts an extra `alternative_template` for the cases of raising TemplateNotFound [#44](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/44).
- Removed `handle_status_code` internal functionality as it is no longer used.

### Fixed

- `handler` type for Gateway and WebsocketGateway.
- The split bytes intead of b''.

## 0.9.0

### Added

- `DirectInjects` object for the direct dependency injection without using Inject and `dependencies` from the handler [#42](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/42).

### Fixed

- `include_in_schema` on a Gateway level for OpenAPI specification [#42](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/42).
- `redirect_slashes` when instantiating an Esmerald/ChildEsmerald application wasn't
validating the value properly.
- TemplateNotFound raised when a template is not found [#42](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/42).
- jinja2 Environment to have autoescape by default [#43](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/43)

## 0.8.1

### Added

- Added Template and Redirect to app imports.
This was supposed to go in the release 0.8.0 but somehow it was missed.

## 0.8.0

January 22, 2023

### Added

- New `File` and `Form` params to Esmerald.
- Add new `Injects` as parameter function.
- Add new `ArbitraryHashableBaseModel` to handle the `Inject` with arbitrary types.
- Add new [settings_config](./application/settings.md#the-settings_config) parameter. [#40](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/40).

### Changed

- Removed unused internal parameters for old functions.
- `scheduler_class` is now a property in the EsmeraldSettings. This allows to override fields
without issues.
- Deprecate `settings` parameter from `RequestSettingsMiddleware`.

### Fixed

- Error messages being thrown.
- Fix `enable_openapi` boolean for ChildEsmerald and submodules and `include_in_schema` for Include [#37](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/37)
- Fix types for OpenAPI for applications that are subclasses of Esmerald or ChildEsmerald [#38](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/38)

## 0.7.0

### Added

- New [RequestSettingsMiddleware](./middleware/middleware.md#requestsettingsmiddleware) allowing accessing the settings of the application
from the request.
- Settings resolution for the whole application [#30](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/issues/30).

### Changed

- Request now has a `settings` property that can be accessed upon the installation
of the [RequestSettingsMiddleware](./middleware/middleware.md#requestsettingsmiddleware).

### Fixed

- `license` reference upon instantiation from the settings.

## 0.6.2

### Changed

- Add support for kwargs in the Dao and AsyncDAO [#28](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/issues/28)

### Fixed

- Mypy references for the Gateway and WebsocketGateway being added to the handler.
- References to the Esmerald types causing the IDE to misread them.

## 0.6.1

### Changed

- Include now supports its own middleware handling and loading [#26](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/26).
This hange make sure that the parent level doesn't get affected and do not influence the middleware
of other includes.
- [JWTConfig](./configurations/jwt.md) `api_key_header` now defaults to `Authorization`.

### Fixed

- JWT Token encoding and decoding [#26](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/26).
- JWT middleware handling the headers

## 0.6.0

### Added

- Added support to the new [Interceptors](./interceptors.md). [#25](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/25)

### Changed

- Added support to httpx 0.23.3
- Updated document references pointing to [Interceptors](./interceptors.md).

### Fixed

- `JWTAuthMiddleware` from `esmerald.contrib.auth.tortoise.middleware` raising exception
on invalid token.
- Fixed code references to the `Void`.

## 0.5.4

### Changed

- Updated version of asyncz to support 0.1.4.
- Fixed dependencies when installing Esmerald based on Asyncz requirements.
- Minor fixes.

## 0.5.3

### Changed

- Added support to httpx 0.23.2

## 0.5.2

### Changed

- Support for Asyncz 0.1.3

## 0.5.1

### Changed

- Add support for Asyncz 0.1.2

## 0.5.0

!!! Warning
    This changes might contain some backward incompatibilities if you are already using the
    previous scheduler.

## Changed

- **Deprecated** the integration with `APScheduler` in favour of [Asyncz](https://asyncz.tarsild.io).
[#15](https://github.com/dymmond/esmerald/pull/15)
- Upgraded the Esmerald official symbol.

!!! Warning
    If you are using the `@scheduler` with the `func` and `identifier` params, please check the
    [documentation](./scheduler/handler.md) to understand how to upgrade to the new scheduler.
    It is almost the same but with some minor changes to the parameters

## 0.4.2

### Changed

- Created `BaseModelExtra` parser removing repetition of code across transformers.

### Fix

- Configurations for scheduler being passed as params.
- Scheduler in the slots.

## 0.4.1

### Changed

- Added support for Starlette 0.23.1.

## 0.4.0

### Changed

- Updated support to Starlette 0.23.0
- Updated the EsmeraldTestClient to support headers.

### Fixed

- [Token](./configurations/jwt.md#token-model) parameters being passed to `python-jose`.
- Update internal references to the JWT.

## 0.3.1

### Added

- HashableBaseModel allowing the __hash__ to be done via pydantic BaseModels.

### Changed

- Update transformer model field and functions.

### Fixed

- Minor doc fixes.

## 0.3.0

### Changed

- Deprecated kwargs and signature to give place to Esmerald transformers.
- Code cleaning and improved performance by applying pure pydantic models internally.

## 0.2.11

### Fixed

- When instantiating an `Esmerald` object, `app_name` should be passed instead of `name`.

## 0.2.10

### Changed

- Supporting Starlette version 0.22.0.

### Fixed

- `max_age` from [SessionConfig](./configurations/session.md) allowing negative numbers being passed
and can be used for testing purposes or to clear a session.

## 0.2.9

### Fixed

- `redirect_slashes` property added to the main Esmerald object and settings options.

## 0.2.8

### Fixed

- `@router` allowing validation for Options for CORS middleware.

## 0.2.7

### Added

- Officially supporting python 3.11.

## 0.2.6

### Changed

- Removed Tortoise ORM dependency from the main package.
- Removed `asyncpg` from the main package as dependency.

## 0.2.5

### Changed

- Removed `auth.py` from security package as is no longer used. This was supposed to go in the release 0.2.4.

## 0.2.4

### Changed

- Removed `settings.py` from permissions as it is no longer used.

## 0.2.3

### Fixed

- OpenAPI documentation rendering for the same path with different http methods.

## 0.2.2

### Added

- `httpx` and `itsdangerous` dependencies.

## 0.2.1

### Changed

- Removed `archive`.
- Removed unnecessary comments.

### Fixed

- Generation of projects and apps using `esmerald` by removing the clutter.

## 0.2.0

### Added

- `esmerald` entrypoint allowing generating projects and apps via [directives](./directives/directives.md).

### Fixed

- Namespace conflicts when importing the `Include` and the `include` internal function.

## 0.1.3

### Changed

- `add_route` - Fixed the way the add_route was managing the paths and import to OpenAPI docs.


## 0.1.2

### Changed

- `add_routes` - Fixed the way the add_route was managing the paths and import to OpenAPI docs.

## 0.1.1

### Changed

- `pyproject.toml` - Added missing dependencies.

## 0.1.0

This release is the first release of Esmerald and it contain all the essentials to start a project from the simplest
version to the most advanced.

### Added

- **Fluid and Fast**: Thanks to Starlette and Pydantic.
- **Fast to develop**: Thanks to the simplicity of design, the development times can be reduced exponentially.
- **Intuitive**: If you are used to the other frameworks, Esmerald is a no brainer to develop.
- **Easy**: Developed with design in mind and easy learning.
- **Short**: With the OOP available natively there is no need for code duplication. SOLID.
- **Ready**: Get your application up and running with production-ready code.
- **OOP and Functional**: Design APIs in any desired way. OOP or Functional is available.
- **Async and Sync**: Do you prefer sync or async? You can have both.
- **Middleware**: Apply middlewares on the application level or API level.
- **Exception Handlers**: Apply exception handlers on any desired level.
- **Permissions**: Apply specific rules and permissions on each API.
- **DAO and AsyncDAO**: Avoid database calls directly from the APIs. Use business objects instead.
- **Tortoise ORM**: Native support for Tortoise ORM.
- **APIView**: Class Based endpoints for your beloved OOP design.
- **JSON serialization/deserialization**: Both UJSON and ORJON support.
- **Lifespan**: Support for the newly lifespan and on_start/on_shutdown events.
- **Dependency Injection**: Like any other great framework out there.
- **Scheduler**: Yes, that's right, it comes with a scheduler for those automated tasks.
- **Simplicity from settings**: Yes, we have a way to make the code even cleaner by introducing settings
based systems.
